Abstract

Background  Short interspersed elements (SINEs) are non-autonomous retroelements that are transcribed 
by RNA polymerase III from an internal promoter. Most SINE families originate from tRNAs, but a few, exclusively 
within supraprimates (primates, rodents, tree shrews) and, exceptionally, hagfish, derive from the 7SL RNA. These 
7SL-derived SINEs all arose after an ~ 183-nt central deletion in the 7SL RNA sequence and are mobilized by LINE1-
encoded reverse transcriptase. No 7SL-derived SINE has previously been reported outside these taxa.

Results  Mining of mole (Talpidae) genomes revealed no mole-specific tRNA-derived SINE in the gracile shrew mole 
Uropsilus gracilis. Instead, ~ 280 000 copies of a dimeric 7SL RNA-derived SINE, named Urop, populate its genome 
but not five other talpid species. Three subfamilies (a–c) share two 7SL-derived monomers joined by an A-rich linker. 
The left monomer and Urop_a right monomer carry the canonical central deletion; Urop_b/c right monomers addi-
tionally harbor a 24-nt tandem duplication, paralleling the 29-nt quasi-dimer of murid B1. Monomeric fossils suggest 
they preceded dimeric Urop formation. Sequence divergence and subfamily analysis date the origin of Urop soon 
after the Uropsilinae split from other moles. Urop_c, the youngest subfamily, displays a striking excess of extra-long 
pure poly(A) tails, far exceeding those in young human AluY elements.



Conclusions  Urop represents a remarkable case of convergent evolution, independently generating an Alu-like 
dimeric SINE in a distantly related mammal. Its independent origin from 7SL RNA, parallel structural trajectory (mono-
mer → dimer via identical deletion boundaries), and suppression of tRNA-derived SINEs mirror the evolutionary history 
of primate Alu. The abundance of long intact poly(A) tails in Urop_c suggests unique biochemical controls on tail 
dynamics and hint at continued retropositional activity. These findings underscore the exceptional evolutionary 
potential of rare, large-scale deletions within 7SL RNA as a SINE progenitor and raises new questions about poly(A) tail 
regulation and SINE family dynamics.
Keywords  SINE, Alu, Transposable element, Retrotransposon, Retroposon, 7SL RNA, SRP RNA, Uropsilus, Talpidae, 
Eulipotyphla
Background
Short interspersed elements (SINEs) are non-autono-
mous mobile genetic retroelements less than 600  bp in 
length that are transcribed by RNA polymerase III (pol 
III) from an internal promoter. SINEs are characteristic 
of the vast majority of multicellular organisms, and the 
number of their copies in the genome can reach one 
million [1]. Their new genomic copies are generated by 
reverse transcription of SINE RNA by an enzyme of a 
long interspersed element (LINE) present in the same 
*Correspondence:
Sergey Kosushkin
toki@mail.ru
Dmitri Kramerov
kramerov@eimb.ru
1 Engelhardt Institute of Molecular Biology, Russian Academy of Sciences, 
119991 Moscow, Russia
2 Center for Advanced Technologies, Academy of Sciences of the Republic 
Uzbekistan, 100174 Tashkent, Uzbekistan
Kosushkin et al. BMC Biology           (2026) 24:78 
genome. In placental mammals, most SINE families use 
LINE1 (L1) reverse transcriptase for their retrotransposi-
tion, which requires a poly(A) tail at the end of the SINE 
RNA. The integration of SINEs into new genomic loci 
often has no effect on host function, but sometimes it can 
either disrupt gene function, causing inherited diseases 
[2], or introduce new regulatory mechanisms of gene 
transcription as well as pre-mRNA splicing and polyade-
nylation [3–5]. A new SINE family that emerges during 
evolution becomes characteristic of the species and its 
descendants. Thus, SINE families can be characteristic of 
an order or limited to a few mammalian families [6].
Most SINE families originate from one of the tRNA 
species [7–9]. 5S rRNA-derived SINE families are rare, 
while the formation of SINEs from 7SL RNA, a com-
ponent of signal recognition particles, seems to be 
an exceptional event. Surprisingly, 7SL RNA-derived 
SINEs were the first to be discovered: Alu and B1 in the 
human and mouse genomes, respectively [10–12]. Fur-
ther research has shown that Alu is characteristic of the 
primate group [13], while B1 is present in the genomes 
of all rodents studied [14]. In addition, not numerous 
7SL RNA-derived SINEs (Tu types I, II, and m) have 
been found in the genomes of tree shrews [15–17]. Tree 
shrews, primates and rodents belong to the Euarchontog-
lires (Supraprimates) clade, which makes the common 
origin of Alu, B1, and Tu SINEs highly probable.
A precursor SINE probably arose in the supraprimate 
ancestor after a 183-bp deletion in the central region of 
the 7SL RNA sequence (299 nt) [18]. This low-copy SINE 
is called free left Alu monomer (FLAM) in primates and 
proto-B1 (pB1) in rodents. In primates, another precur-
sor, the free right Alu monomer (FRAM), arose after two 
shorter deletions, 155 and 11 nt, in the central part of 
7SL RNA. A combination of FLAM and FRAM gave rise 
to the highly successful dimeric SINE Alu with over one 
million copies in the human genome. In rodents, spe-
cific 7–10-nt deletions within the same region generated 
pB1d7, pB1d9, and pB1d10 SINEs; and the subsequent 
29-bp tandem duplication in pB1d9 (sometimes called 
quasi-dimerization in parallel with dimeric Alu) resulted 
in a highly successful B1 SINE in murids (half a million 
copies in the mouse genome). In tree shrews, the only 
detectable fossil SINE corresponds to the rodent pB1d 
SINEs (the deletion size here is 13 nt). The large align-
ment below illustrates all these alterations.
While the ancestral 7SL RNA-derived SINEs are mon-
omeric, their more successful descendants are dimeric 
with two 7SL RNA units (Alu in primates), 7SL RNA-
tRNA or tRNA-7SL RNA units (B1-dID and SP-D-Geo or 
B4, Men, and SINE type II in rodents and lower primates; 
for references see [9]). Tree shrews have both dimeric and 
trimeric SINEs (Tu types II and III), and their leftmost 
unit is derived from a tRNA [15] or has a dual 7SL RNA 
and tRNA origin [17]. While murid B1 is a remarkable 
example of a successful monomeric 7SL RNA-derived 
SINE, this quasi-dimer has an internal duplication.
SINEs derived from 7SL RNA have not been found 
outside of supraprimates with the sole exception of 
SINE1-1_EBu (hereafter, Ebu1-1) described in the hagfish 
Eptatretus burgeri, whose genome contains 2363 copies 
of this element [19]. Similar to other 7SL RNA-derived 
SINEs, Ebu1-1 has a deletion in approximately the same 
region of the 7SL RNA as other SINEs (see below). 7SL 
RNA-derived SINEs in supraprimates are mobilized by 
L1, which does not require any sequences other than the 
poly(A) tail. Ebu1-1 is mobilized by a hagfish LINE from 
the RTE clade and accordingly contains a bipartite recog-
nition region from the RNA of this LINE and an (AAC)n 
tail.
Here, our search for SINEs in sequenced mole genomes 
(Talpidae) unexpectedly revealed neither Tal, thought to 
be typical of the family, nor other specific tRNA-derived 
SINEs in the genome of the gracile shrew mole (Uropsilus 
gracilis). Instead, we found more than 280,000 copies of a 
7SL RNA-derived SINE called Urop. This SINE is absent 
from the genomes of other moles, consistent with an 
early split of Uropsilinae from the main lineage of moles.
Results
Previously, we described four families of tRNA-derived 
SINEs from the genomes of the order Eulipotyphla: Eri-1 
and Eri-2 (Erinaceidae, hedgehogs and moonrats), Sor 
(Soricidae, shrews), and Tal (Talpidae, moles) based on a 
limited number of sequenced copies [20]. Since then, the 
sequenced genomes of many mammals, including rare 
and exotic species, have become available, allowing us 
to search for SINE sequences in eulipotyphlan genomes. 
First, we found an intrinsic tRNA-derived SINE (Sol) 
in the genome of Solenodon paradoxus (unpublished), 
which belongs to Solenodontidae, another Eulipotyphla 
family. Second, the unambiguous assignment of Eri1 and 
Eri2 SINEs to the family Erinaceidae was confirmed as 
well as Sor SINE to Soricidae, and Tal SINE to Talpidae 
(Fig. 1). Third, we unexpectedly found no Tal or any other 
specific tRNA-derived (or 5S RNA-derived) SINE in the 
genome of the gracile shrew mole Uropsilus gracilis (Tal-
pidae). However, more than 280,000 copies of a dimeric 
7SL RNA-derived SINE named Urop were found in this 
genome. Conversely, we have identified no copies of Urop 
or other 7SL RNA-derived SINEs in the genomes of other 
talpids: Talpa occidentalis, Galemys pyrenaicus, Condy-
lura cristata, and Scalopus aquaticus (Fig. 1).
All copies of Urop were grouped into three subfami-
lies: a, b, and c (Fig. 2). Urop_c was the most abundant 
subfamily (200,883 copies), Urop_a had 56,323 copies, 
Kosushkin et al. BMC Biology           (2026) 24:78 
	
and Urop_b had 24,864 copies. The Urop_a consensus 
looks most basal of three; unlike Urop_b and Urop_c, its 
sequences are more similar to the ancestral Urop-m (see 
below). The left and right monomers are connected by 
A-rich linkers.
Figure 3 shows an alignment of 7SL RNAs with related 
regions of the left (L) and right (R) monomers of each 
of the three Urop subfamilies, the L and R monomers 
of human Alu and their fossil precursors (FLAM and 
FRAM), rodent B1 precursors (pB1 and pB1D10), right 
and central Tu type I and Tu type II monomers of tree 
shrew, and Ebu1-1 of the hagfish. The consensus of each 
of the Urop monomers shows similarity to approximately 
the same 5′ and 3′ end regions of the 7SL RNA as other 
7SL RNA-derived SINEs; in other words, they all origi-
nated from the 7SL RNA sequence after a long deletion 
in its central portion. The size (~ 183 nt) and position of 
this deletion in the left Urop monomers and Urop_a_R is 
Fig. 1  SINE families identified in the genomes of four Eulipotyphla families. The names of tRNA-related SINEs are shown in blue, and the 7SL 
RNA-related Urop is highlighted in red. The Eulipotyphla tree shows five Talpidae species whose genomes have been sequenced. The putative time 
of origin of Tal and Urop SINEs are indicated by arrows. Image licenses are provided in Additional File 2
Fig. 2  Alignment of the consensus sequences of the three Urop subfamilies. 7SL RNA-related monomers are connected by a linker (underlined). 
Consensus boxes A and B of the pol III promoters are shown below the similar SINE regions of Urop
Kosushkin et al. BMC Biology           (2026) 24:78 
consistent with that in Alu_L, FLAM, pB1, and pB1d10/ 
Tu-m.
The right monomers of Urop_b and Urop_c acquired 
a duplication in the region spanning 24 nt, which largely 
overlaps the 29-nt quasi-dimer in rodent B1 albeit 
shorter (boxed in purple and orange, respectively, Fig. 3). 
Note also an additional 11-nt deletion in the left Urop_c 
monomer at a position similar to pB1D10, B1, Tu-m, and 
TuII_C. It is also worth to mention the absence of box B 
in certain right monomers of 7SL RNA-derived SINEs 
(Urop_b/c and Tu types II/III), which is not unexpected 
since a complete promoter (boxes A and B) is required 
in the 5′ part of a gene for pol III transcription initiation.
Apart from the dimeric Urop SINEs described above, 
we found approximately 2000 copies of individual Urop 
monomers in the U. gracilis genome (Additional file  1: 
Fig. S1). Most of them (70%) were flanked by target site 
duplications (TSDs) that occurred after SINE integration 
into the genome. This indicates they were amplified from 
monomeric Urop copies and are independent SINEs 
rather than truncated dimers, which are also abundant in 
the U. gracilis genome. Most likely, it was the fusion of 
pairs of monomeric Urop that gave rise to retroposition-
ally more active subfamilies of dimeric Urop. The Urop-m 
consensus is most similar to the two Urop_a monomers, 
and also closely resembles both pB1 and FLAM (Fig. 3). 
A schematic representation of all the above discussed 
7SL RNA-derived SINEs is given in Fig. 4.
It should be noted that the SINE sequences found 
do not represent genomic contamination with human 
sequences: numerous Alu subfamilies are much more 
similar to each other than any of them are to the Urop 
SINE (Fig. 3); furthermore, the Uropsilus gracilis genome 
contamination was refuted by FCS-GX [21]. Finally, our 
detection of more than 200,000 copies of the Urop SINE 
(Additional file  1: Table  S1) in the genomes of each of 
the 15 Uropsilus species, which have recently become 
available [22], rules out the hypothesis that Urop rep-
resents a primate Alu SINE detected as a result of DNA 
contamination.
Fig. 3  Alignment of the human 7SL RNA sequences with the consensus sequences of the monomers of the three Urop subfamilies, human 
Alu, tree shrew Tu types I and II, mouse B1, and hagfish Ebu1-1. The names of the left, central, and right monomers are indicated by “_L,” “_C,” 
and “_R” suffixes, respectively. The consensus sequences of the fossil human Alu (FLAM and FRAM), mouse B1 (pB1 and pB1d10), tree shrew 
Tu (Tu-m), and shrew mole Urop (Urop-m) are also included. Apart from the human 7SL RNA gene, the one from the mole Talpa occidentalis 
is given for reference (7SL_Hsa and 7SL_Toc, respectively). The central section of 7SL RNA (116 nt) missing in the considered SINEs was removed 
from the alignment. The position of boxes A and B are marked above. Direct repeats (duplications) in B1, Urop_b_R and Urop_c_R are boxed 
in orange and purple, respectively
Kosushkin et al. BMC Biology           (2026) 24:78 
	
Figure  5 illustrates the sequence of events (deletions, 
duplications, and dimerizations) that generated broadly 
similar 7SL RNA-derived SINEs in the shrew mole, pri-
mate, and rodent genomes. The scheme highlights the 
parallelism in the evolution of 7SL RNA-derived SINEs in 
three different groups of mammals.
The average copy similarity to their consensus 
sequences is 83% for Urop_a and Urop_b and 88% for 
Urop_c. The distribution of copies by nucleotide substi-
tutions in them for the three subfamilies (Fig. 6) indicates 
the following. (1) The Urop SINE family arose long ago, 
apparently shortly after the Uropsilus lineage diverged 
from other Talpidae, which occurred about 50 Mya [23]. 
(2) Most Urop copies were integrated into the genome 
many millions of years ago. (3) The Urop_c subfamily 
is younger than the other two and there have been two 
waves of Urop_c amplification (Fig. 6A). Thus, the data 
suggest that Urop represents an old SINE family whose 
activity peaked long ago. However, the Urop_c subfamily 
included two fractions, each consisting of approximately 
300 copies, whose sequences were 98% similar to their 
consensus sequences (Additional file  1: Fig. S2). These 
data suggest recent retropositional activity of certain 
Urop_c copies. In addition, we extracted some Urop_c 
copies with particularly long pure poly(A) tails (Addi-
tional file 1: Fig. S3 shows 16 Urop_c copies with ­A21─90). 
Fig. 4  A schematic of the 7SL RNA-derived SINEs discussed in the study. 7SL RNA and SINEs are shown as rectangles. Gaps between rectangles 
correspond to 7SL RNA regions deleted in SINEs. Boxes A and B of pol III promoters are highlighted in red. Direct repeats (duplications) in B1, 
Urop_b_R and Urop_c_R are marked with arrows. The following SINEs or their monomers are shown in the scheme. Human: FLAM, FRAM, Alu_L, 
and Alu_R. Mouse: pB1, pB1d10, and B1. Tree shrew: Tu-m, Tu-I_R, Tu-II_C, and Tu-II_R. Shrew mole Uropsilus gracilis: Urop-m, Urop_a_L, Urop_b_L, 
Urop_c_L, Urop_a_R, Urop_b_R, and Urop_c_R. Hagfish Eptatretus burger: Ebu1_1
Fig. 5  Similar events underlying the evolution of SINEs from 7SL RNA in shrew mole, primates, and rodents
Kosushkin et al. BMC Biology           (2026) 24:78 
Fig. 6  Sequence analysis of all copies of the three Urop subfamilies with a focus on poly(A) tails in the Uropsilus gracilis genome. A Distribution 
of Urop_a, Urop_b, and Urop_c copies based on similarity to the subfamily consensus sequence. B Distribution of copies of Urop_a, Urop_b, 
and Urop_c by the length of their poly(A) tails. Similar data obtained for the old (J) and young (Y) human Alu subfamilies are shown for reference. 
C Distribution of Urop_a, Urop_b, and Urop_c copies with extra-long ­(A≥50) tails. Similar data obtained for the old (J) and young (Y) human Alu 
subfamilies are shown for reference. The point at x = 150 shows the number of copies with a tail equal to or longer than A150
Kosushkin et al. BMC Biology           (2026) 24:78 
	
In L1-mobilized SINEs, long poly(A) tails are known to 
be characteristic of recently integrated and potentially 
active copies; these poly(A) tails shorten and acquire 
nucleotide substitutions over time [24–27]. Thus, Urop_c 
copies with long pure poly(A) tails have been amplified 
and incorporated into the genome relatively recently, 
suggesting the recent activity of Urop_c subfamily.
We analyzed the poly(A) tails in 149,255 copies of 
Urop_c and in 123,730 copies of human AluY. Pure 12–25-
long A-tails are readily identified in Urop_c, similar to the 
young AluY subfamily, as visualized by the additional peak 
in the plots (Fig. 6B). This finding confirms the presence of 
a significant number of young copies in the Urop_c sub-
family. Subsequent analysis of pure extra-long ­(A>50) tails 
revealed at least twice shorter pure A-tails in AluY com-
pared to Urop_c, which exceeded 150 bp at several dozen 
loci (Fig. 6C). Furthermore, the number of Urop_c copies 
with ­A>50 is much higher (2750) than that of such AluY 
copies (140). It is worth noting that copies of Urop_a and 
Urop_b with very long tails ­(A50–150) also occur, although 
in much smaller numbers compared to Urop_c (Fig. 6C). 
A sample of Urop_c copies with extra-long tails ­(A139–178) 
is shown in Additional file 1: Fig. S4. It is not unlikely that 
certain aspects of Urop template slippage during DNA 
replication or reverse transcription underlie such elonga-
tion of poly(A) tails relative to Alu. In addition, it is likely 
that the poly(A) tails of at least some Urop copies shorten 
much more slowly than those of young Alu, and nucleo-
tide substitutions occur in them at a lower rate. The bio-
chemical processes underlying the differential elongation 
and shortening of SINE poly(A) tails in Uropsilus gracilis 
and humans remain to be elucidated.

Discussion
Evolutionary origins and distribution of SINEs
SINEs have evolved throughout the evolution of genomes. 
When one of the cellular RNAs is reverse transcribed and 
cDNA integrated into the genome, its genomic copies 
can gradually acquire properties that make them capable 
of amplification [28]. Despite the extreme rarity of such 
events, most genomes of higher eukaryotes, especially 
those of mammals, contain large numbers of SINE cop-
ies. The period of activity of SINE families is limited and 
their taxonomic distribution is restricted to a range of 
related taxa, from family to order (although relict copies 
of SINEs active in the ancestors of higher-ranked taxa are 
not uncommon).
Discovery and taxonomic implications of the Urop SINE 
family
We have described the Urop SINE family from the 
genome of the shrew mole Uropsilus gracilis. We have 
also shown that Urop is present in the genomes of 
a dozen other living species of the genus Uropsilus, 
which constitute the subfamily Uropsilinae of the fam-
ily Talpidae. The split of the extant Uropsilus into spe-
cies occurred no earlier than 8 Mya [29], while the lowest 
estimated age of old Urop copies is 33 My (assuming 
that the nucleotide substitution rate in Uropsilus is as 
high as in rodents [30]). In addition, there are no copies 
of Tal in the Uropsilus gracilis genome, which is a char-
acteristic SINE in other subfamilies of the Talpidae. The 
data obtained suggests that Urop appeared in the Urop-
silinae, while Tal appeared in the common ancestor of the 
other Talpidae after the divergence of these two lineages 
(Fig. 1A). To date, this is a unique example of such a con-
trasting distribution of different SINE types (tRNA- and 
7SL RNA-derived) within the same family; this may con-
firm the elevation of Uropsilinae to a family, as proposed 
elsewhere [31].
Parallel evolution of 7SL RNA‑derived SINEs
Although Alu is probably the best-known example of a 
SINE, independent lineages of 7SL RNA-derived SINEs 
are extremely rare compared to SINEs of other origins: 
to date, such SINEs have only been identified in suprapri-
mates and hagfish. Moreover, mammals are the best-
studied class with respect to SINEs. In this context, the 
discovery of an independent 7SL RNA-derived family of 
SINEs was very unexpected.
The finding of a 7SL RNA-derived SINE structur-
ally similar to human Alu in a very distant mammal is 
remarkable. Previously, 7SL RNA-derived SINEs have 
been described in supraprimates (e.g., Alu in primates, 
B1 in rodents, and Tu types I and II in tree shrews), all 
of which share a common ancestry. Another example, 
Ebu1-1 in hagfish, only underscores the extraordinary 
origin of SINEs from 7SL RNA.
Unlike most other 7SL RNA-derived SINEs, all three 
Urop subfamilies (a, b, and c), like Alu, are composed of 
two 7SL RNA-derived monomers joined by an A-rich 
linker. The right and left monomers in both Alu and 
Urop are similar but not identical (except for the Urop_a 
monomers).
The 183-nt deletion in the central part of the 7SL RNA 
that preceded the formation of the left Urop monomer 
is nearly identical to the deletion in all successful 7SL 
RNA-derived SINEs (and the 3′ boundary is the same 
even in the very distant hagfish Ebu1-1) (Fig.  3). This 
striking similarity of deletions that occurred in com-
pletely different lineages suggests that the molecular 
mechanisms of their generation and/or functional selec-
tion are the same. Perhaps these deletion boundaries are 
determined by the secondary structures of the 7SL RNA. 
Kosushkin et al. BMC Biology           (2026) 24:78 
Under this premise, the boundaries of the 183-nt deletion 
(marked with red arrows in Additional file 1: Fig. S5) lie 
side by side in the folded 7SL RNA. These regular, albeit 
extremely rare, deletions in the 7SL RNA have prob-
ably allowed the emergence of amplification-competent 
SINEs.
We believe that the similarity of Alu and Urop SINEs 
is due to their independent origin from 7SL RNA in pri-
mates and shrew moles rather than to horizontal SINE 
transfer between these mammals. Unlike other mobile 
genetic elements, there is no clear evidence for horizontal 
transfer of SINEs. Although the possibility of SINE hori-
zontal transfer has been suggested several times [32–34], 
subsequent studies have seriously questioned it [35–37].
Overall, the independent emergence of dimeric 7SL 
RNA-derived Alu and Urop is a vivid example of paral-
lel evolution. Interestingly, higher primates and shrew 
moles have only 7SL RNA-derived SINEs and lack spe-
cific tRNA-derived SINEs. (Relict SINEs such as Ther1 
and Ther2 are not considered.) At the same time, the vast 
majority of mammalian species have one or more fami-
lies of tRNA-derived SINEs in their genomes. In rodents, 
in addition to the 7SL RNA-derived SINE B1, there are 
tRNA-derived SINEs ID and B2 (the latter is only charac-
teristic of mouse-like rodents). It is possible that the high 
retropositional activity of the dimeric 7SL RNA-derived 
SINEs Alu and Urop prevented the appearance and 
spread of tRNA-derived SINEs in the genomes of higher 
primates and shrew moles.
Retropositional activity and subfamily dynamics
By analyzing the level of nucleotide substitutions in Urop 
copies relative to the consensus sequences of the sub-
families, we concluded that Urop_a and Urop_b are older 
than the Urop_c subfamily. Within Urop_c, we detected 
“tribes” (groups of sequences with 98% intragroup nucle-
otide similarity), indicating their relatively recent integra-
tion into the genome (about 2.5 Mya); it is possible that 
such copies are still retropositionally active. Long poly(A) 
tails in L1-mobilized SINEs indicate their relatively recent 
integration into the genome and possible retropositional 
activity [24–26]. We have shown a remarkable fraction 
of copies with rather long poly(A) tails ­(A13─25) among 
Urop_c, as in the young AluY subfamily. Odom et al. [25] 
suggested that the most retropositionally active Alu cop-
ies should have extra-long ­(A>50) poly(A) tails. Unexpect-
edly, there were 20 times more copies with extra-long 
poly(A) tails among Urop_c than among AluY; moreover, 
the tail length of such Urop_c was at least twice that of 
AluY. Such long poly(A) tails in certain Urop copies may 
indicate specific mechanisms controlling poly(A) tail 
elongation and shortening in Uropsilus gracilis.
Implications for SINE evolution
The independent emergence of 7SL RNA-derived SINEs 
(Alu/B1, Urop, Ebu1-1) highlights parallel evolution 
driven by: uniform 7SL RNA deletions, which enable 
functional SINE formation; dimeric structures, which 
likely enhance retroposition efficiency; and subfamily 
diversification (e.g., Urop_a/b/c), which reflects progres-
sive optimization for retroposition.
Conclusions
Urop discovery underscores the rarity and significance 
of 7SL RNA-derived SINEs, revealing convergent evo-
lutionary pathways across distant lineages. The shared 
structural and mechanistic features of Alu and Urop, 
despite their independent origins, provide new insights 
into SINE emergence and diversification. Future studies 
should explore the molecular basis of poly(A) tail dynam-
ics and the competitive exclusion of tRNA-derived SINEs 
in genomes dominated by 7SL RNA-derived families.

Methods
Genome assemblies of Uropsilus gracilis (UroGra_
v1_BIUU), Talpa occidentalis (MPIMG_talOcc4v2.1), 
Galemys pyrenaicus (Gpyr_1.0), Condylura cristata 
(ConCri1.0), Scalopus aquaticus (ScaAqu_v1_BIUU), 
and Homo sapiens (T2T-CHM13v2.0) were downloaded 
from NCBI Genomes (https://​www.​ncbi.​nlm.​nih.​gov/​
datas​ets/​genome/). Genome assemblies of 15 Uropsilus 
species were downloaded from.
https://​datad​ryad.​org/​datas​et/https://​doi.​org/​10.​5061/​
dryad.​t1g1j​wtc9 (consensus_seq_for_dfoil.zip) [22]. Cop-
ies of the SINE were found using the ssearch36 program 
from the 3.6 release of the FASTA package [38] with at 
least 65% identity and 90% length overlap with the query 
sequence. Searching the genome for query sequences 
corresponding to Urop subfamilies resulted in a set of 
hits, some of which overlapped. To eliminate redundancy, 
the overlapping hits were merged using the bedtools 
merge program with default parameters. The result-
ing coordinate set represents non-redundant genomic 
regions. AluY sequences were extracted from the human 
genome using the RepeatMasker annotations (https://​
hgdow​nload.​soe.​ucsc.​edu/​golde​nPath/​hs1/​bigZi​ps/).
Sequence manipulations were performed using SeqKit 
[39] and standard Linux programs. BED genomic inter-
vals were operated using bedtools v2.31.0 [40]. Multiple 
sequence alignments were generated using MAFFT [41] 
and edited using GeneDoc (http://​www.​nrbsc.​org/​gfx/​
gened​oc/​index.​html). Consensus sequences were gen-
erated from multiple sequence alignments in GeneDoc 
or using the cons program from the EMBOSS package 
(http://​emboss.​open-​bio.​org/​html/​use/​pr02s​04.​html). 
Kosushkin et al. BMC Biology           (2026) 24:78 
	
The mean similarity was determined for 10,000 randomly 
selected sequences as the mean pairwise similarity with 
the consensus sequence using the esl-alistat program 
(hmmer.org). The A-tail lengths were determined by 
alignment of a SINE sequence with the corresponding 
consensus without tail and counting the length of the 
downstream pure poly(A) sequence.
RNA secondary structure folding was performed on 
the mfold server using the default settings http://​www.​
unafo​ld.​org/​mfold/​appli​catio​ns/​rna-​foldi​ng-​form.​php.
Abbreviations
SINE	
Short interspersed element
LINE	
Long interspersed element
pol III	
RNA polymerase III
FLAM	
Free left Alu monomer
FRAM	
Free right Alu monomer
pB1	
Proto-B1
TSDs	
Target site duplications
Mya	
Million years ago
Supplementary Information
The online version contains supplementary material available at https://​doi.​
org/​10.​1186/​s12915-​026-​02550-6.
Additional File 1: Figures S1-S5 and Table S1. Figure S1—Examples of free 
monomer Urop elements (Urop-m) from the genome of Uropsilus gracilis. 
Figure S2—Copies of Urop_c from tribe 1. Figure S3—Examples of Urop_c 
and Urop_b copies with long poly(A) tails. Figure S4—Examples of Urop_c 
copies with extra-long poly(A) tails (from ­A139 to ­A178). Figure S5—Second-
ary structure of 7SL RNA and boundaries of 183-nt deletion. Table S1—
Copy numbers of Urop SINEs in the genomes various Uropsilus species.
Additional File 2: Image licenses for Fig. 1.
Authors’ contributions
S.K. and N.V., bioinformatics research and preparation of illustrations; D.K. and 
O.B., data analysis; D.K., S.K., and N.V., writing the manuscript. All authors read 
and approved the final manuscript.
Funding
The research was funded by the Russian Science Foundation (project no. 
25–24-00339).
Data availability
All genomic data used in this study were sourced from public repositories 
listed in the Methods section. Significant data are presented in Additional File 1.
Declarations
Ethics approval and consent to participate
Not applicable.
Consent for publication
All the authors read and approved the manuscript for publication.
Competing interests
The authors declare no competing interests.
References
	1.	
Kramerov DA, Vassetzky NS. SINEs. Wiley Interdiscip Rev RNA. 
2011;2:772–86.
	2.	
Chen JM, Férec C, Cooper DN. LINE-1 endonuclease-dependent retro-
transpositional events causing human genetic disease: mutation detec-
tion bias and multiple mechanisms of target gene disruption. J Biomed 
Biotechnol. 2006;2006:1–9.
	3.	
Ferrigno O, Virolle T, Djabari Z, Ortonne JP, White RJ, Aberdam D. Transpos-
able B2 SINE elements can provide mobile RNA polymerase II promoters. 
Nat Genet. 2001;28:77–81.
	4.	
Krull M, Brosius J, Schmitz J. Alu-SINE exonization: en route to protein-
coding function. Mol Biol Evol. 2005;22:1702–11.
	5.	
Chen C, Ara T, Gautheret D. Using Alu elements as polyadenylation sites: a 
case of retroposon exaptation. Mol Biol Evol. 2009;26:327–34.
	6.	
Kramerov DA, Vassetzky NS. Origin and evolution of SINEs in eukaryotic 
genomes. Heredity Edinb. 2011;107:487–95.
	7.	
Sakamoto K, Okada N. Rodent type 2 Alu family, rat identifier sequence, 
rabbit C family, and bovine or goat 73-bp repeat may have evolved from 
tRNA genes. J Mol Evol. 1985;22:134–40.
	8.	
Daniels GR, Deininger PL. Repeat sequence families derived from mam-
malian tRNA genes. Nature. 1985;317:819–22.
	9.	
Vassetzky NS, Kramerov DA. SINEBase: a database and tool for SINE analy-
sis. Nucleic Acids Res. 2013;41:D83-9.
	10.	 Krayev AS, Kramerov DA, Skryabin KG, Ryskov AP, Bayev AA, Georgiev GP. 
The nucleotide sequence of the ubiquitous repetitive DNA sequence B1 
complementary to the most abundant class of mouse fold-back RNA. 
Nucleic Acids Res. 1980;8:1201–15.
	11.	 Deininger PL, Jolly DJ, Rubin CM, Friedmann T, Schmid CW. Base 
sequence studies of 300 nucleotide renatured repeated human DNA 
clones. J Mol Biol. 1981;151:17–33.
	12.	 Ullu E, Tschudi C. Alu sequences are processed 7SL RNA genes. Nature 
ENGLAND. 1984;312:171–2.
	13.	 Deininger P. Alu elements: know the SINEs. Genome Biol. 2011;12:1–12.
	14.	 Veniaminova NA, Vassetzky NS, Kramerov DA. B1 SINEs in different rodent 
families. Genomics. 2007;89:678–86.
	15.	 Nishihara H, Terai Y, Okada N. Characterization of novel Alu- and tRNA-
related SINEs from the tree shrew and evolutionary implications of their 
origins. Mol Biol Evol. 2002;19:1964–72.
	16.	 Vassetzky NS, Ten OA, Kramerov DA. B1 and related SINEs in mammalian 
genomes. Gene. 2003;319:149–60.
	17.	 Kriegs JO, Churakov G, Jurka J, Brosius J, Schmitz J. Evolutionary history of 
7SL RNA-derived SINEs in Supraprimates. Trends Genet. 2007;23:158–61.
	18.	 Quentin Y. A master sequence related to a free left Alu monomer (FLAM) 
at the origin of the B1 family in rodent genomes. Nucleic Acids Res. 
1994;22:2222–7.
	19.	 Kojima KK. Hagfish genome reveals parallel evolution of 7SL RNA-derived 
SINEs. Mob DNA Mobile DNA. 2020;11:1–9.
	20.	 Borodulina OR, Kramerov DA. Short interspersed elements (SINEs) from 
insectivores. Two classes of mammalian SINEs distinguished by A-rich tail 
structure. Mamm Genome. 2001;12:779–86.
	21.	 Astashyn A, Tvedte ES, Sweeney D, Sapojnikov V, Bouk N, Joukov V, et al. 
Rapid and sensitive detection of genome contamination at scale with 
FCS-GX. Genome Biol BioMed Central. 2024;25:1–25.
	22.	 Li Y-X, Chen Z-Z, Li Q, Zhang T, Cheng F, Song W-Y, et al. Species Diversi-
fication in the Sky Islands of Southwestern China Revealed by Genomic, 
Introgression, and Demographic Analyses of Asian Shrew Moles. Syst Biol. 
2025;0:1–15. Oxford University Press.
	23.	 Springer MS, Murphy WJ, Roca AL, Elsevier. Appropriate fossil calibrations 
and tree constraints uphold the Mesozoic divergence of solenodons 
from other extant mammals. Mol Phylogenet Evol. 2018;121:158–65.
	24.	 Roy-Engel AM, Salem AH, Oyeniran OO, Deininger L, Hedges DJ, Kilroy 
GE, et al. Active Alu element “A-tails”: size does matter. Genome Res. 
2002;12:1333–44.
	25.	 Odom GL, Robichaux JL, Deininger PL. Predicting mammalian SINE 
subfamily activity from A-tail length. Mol Biol Evol. 2004;21:2140–8.
	26.	 Vassetzky NS, Borodulina OR, Ustyantsev IG, Kosushkin SA, Kramerov 
DA. Analysis of SINE families B2, dip, and ves with special reference to 
polyadenylation signals and transcription terminators. Int J Mol Sci. 2021. 
https://​doi.​org/​10.​3390/​ijms2​21898​97.
Kosushkin et al. BMC Biology           (2026) 24:78 
	27.	 Kosushkin SA, Ustyantsev IG, Borodulina OR, Vassetzky NS, Kramerov DA. 
Tail Wags Dog ’ s SINE : Retropositional Mechanisms of Can SINE Depend 
on Its A-Tail Structure. Biology (Basel). 2022;11:1403.
	28.	 Alemán C, Roy-Engel AM, Shaikh TH, Deininger PL, Aleman C. Cis-acting 
influences on Alu RNA levels. Nucleic Acids Res. 2000;28:4755–61.
	29.	 Wan T, He K, Jiang XL. Multilocus phylogeny and cryptic diversity in Asian 
shrew-like moles (Uropsilus, Talpidae): implications for taxonomy and 
conservation. BMC Evol Biol. 2013;13:1–13.
	30.	 Gibbs RA, Weinstock GM, Metzker ML, Muzny DM, Sodergren EJ, Scherer 
S, et al. Genome sequence of the Brown Norway rat yields insights into 
mammalian evolution. Nature. 2004;428:493–521.
	31.	 Bannikova AA. Molecular evolution and the problems of phylogenetic 
reconstruction of true insectivores (Mammalia: Eulipotyphla) [Doctoral 
dissertation]. Moscow: Moscow State University; 2019.
	32.	 Kordis D, Gubensek F. Horizontal SINE transfer between vertebrate 
classes. Nat Genet. 1995;10:131–2.
	33.	 Piskurek O, Okada N. Poxviruses as possible vectors for horizontal transfer 
of retroposons from reptiles to mammals. Proc Natl Acad Sci USA. 
2007;104:12046–51.
	34.	 Han G, Zhang N, Jiang H, Meng X, Qian K, Zheng Y, et al. Diversity of short 
interspersed nuclear elements (SINEs) in lepidopteran insects and evi-
dence of horizontal SINE transfer between baculovirus and lepidopteran 
hosts. BMC Genomics BMC Genomics. 2021;22:1–16.
	35.	 Gogolevsky KP, Vassetzky NS, Kramerov DA. Bov-b-mobilized SINEs in 
vertebrate genomes. Gene. 2008;407:75–85.
	36.	 Fawcett JA, Innan H. High similarity between distantly related species of 
a plant SINE family is consistent with a scenario of vertical transmission 
without horizontal transfers. Mol Biol Evol. 2016;33:2593–604.
	37.	 Platt RN, Vandewege MW, Ray DA. Mammalian transposable elements 
and their impacts on genome evolution. Chromosom Res. 2018;26:25–43.
	38.	 Pearson WR, Lipman DJ. Improved tools for biological sequence compari-
son. Proc Natl Acad Sci U S A. 1988;85:2444–8.
	39.	 Shen W, Le S, Li Y, Hu F. SeqKit: a cross-platform and ultrafast toolkit for 
FASTA/Q file manipulation. PLoS One. 2016;11:1–10.
	40.	 Quinlan AR, Hall IM. BEDTools: a flexible suite of utilities for comparing 
genomic features. Bioinformatics. 2010;26:841–2.
	41.	 Yamada KD, Tomii K, Katoh K. Application of the MAFFT sequence align-
ment program to large data - reexamination of the usefulness of chained 
guide trees. Bioinformatics. 2016;32:3246–51.
Publisher’s Note
Springer Nature remains neutral with regard to jurisdictional claims in pub-
lished maps and institutional affiliations.